Add release notes for v23.1.13 (#18113)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.1/v23.1.13.md

## v23.1.13

Release Date: December 4, 2023

{{ site.data.alerts.callout_info }}
<release_version> is currently available only on select CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} and {{ site.data.products.serverless }} clusters. If you wish to upgrade your cluster to this version, please submit a [support request](https://support.cockroachlabs.com/hc/en-us/requests/new).

This release is currently not available for CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.core }} customers.
{{ site.data.alerts.end }}

{% comment %}{% include releases/release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}{% endcomment %}

<h3 id="v23-1-13-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - A new option for the [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/restore.html) syntax, `strip_localities`, has been added. This can be used to strip the [locality information](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#set-locality) from a backup when there are mismatched [cluster regions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/multiregion-overview.html#cluster-regions) between the backup's cluster and the target cluster. The following are behaviors that will most likely not be encountered with the specific use case that this patch provides, but are documented nonetheless:      - Adding a [primary region](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-database.html#set-primary-region) to a regionless restore (with or without [regional by row table(s)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/table-localities.html#regional-by-row-tables)) will not work out-of-the-box, but does produce an accurate message detailing a user to essentially [`DROP TYPE [database].public.crdb_internal_region;`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/drop-type.html) (and for cluster restores, [`ALTER DATABASE [database] CONFIGURE ZONE DISCARD;`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-database.html#remove-a-replication-zone)).

Author: ah sorry, they're absolute because we've had several changes to our link syntax in the last few months and particularly because of the way the release note includes are buried in folders I was having a hard time getting relative links to work.  There is also the pretty verbose Liquid full link syntax we're supposed to use elsewhere I think but I went with this in the release notes since the Liquid syntax is just as long but even more complicated IMO 🤷

> - A new option for the [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/restore.html) syntax, `strip_localities`, has been added. This can be used to strip the [locality information](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#set-locality) from a backup when there are mismatched [cluster regions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/multiregion-overview.html#cluster-regions) between the backup's cluster and the target cluster. The following are behaviors that will most likely not be encountered with the specific use case that this patch provides, but are documented nonetheless:      - Adding a [primary region](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-database.html#set-primary-region) to a regionless restore (with or without [regional by row table(s)](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/table-localities.html#regional-by-row-tables)) will not work out-of-the-box, but does produce an accurate message detailing a user to essentially [`DROP TYPE [database].public.crdb_internal_region;`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/drop-type.html) (and for cluster restores, [`ALTER DATABASE [database] CONFIGURE ZONE DISCARD;`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-database.html#remove-a-replication-zone)).

Author: Fixed, thanks!

>     - Restoring a cluster/database/table with a regional by row table will not work out-of-the box. In particular, if we are performing writes, the [`crdb_region` column](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#crdb_region) needs to specify the region of the new row(s) being written to the table. The user will need to alter said column and set a default that makes sense, along with discarding the zone config (this latter is due to the fact that the zone config holds all outdated info related to the [partitions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/partitioning.html), [constraints](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/constraints.html), etc.). These are due to a conflict with the `crdb_region` column already being present in the regionless restore. This column specifies each row's home region and is a prefix to the table's primary key. Stripping localities does not touch this column as it would be an expensive operation that includes rewriting the entire table. [#111863][#111863]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Restoring a cluster/database/table with a regional by row table will not work out-of-the box. In particular, when performing writes, the [`crdb_region` column](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#crdb_region) needs to be set to the region of each new row being written to a given table. An administrator should set a default `crdb_region` value for the cluster. To write to a different region, the user must alter the `crdb_region` value, and must also discard the zone config (because the zone config may hold outdated information about [partitions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/partitioning.html), [constraints](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/constraints.html), or other cluster metadata). For more details, refer to the pull request. [#111863][#111863]
```

>     - Restoring a cluster/database/table with a regional by row table will not work out-of-the box. In particular, if we are performing writes, the [`crdb_region` column](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#crdb_region) needs to specify the region of the new row(s) being written to the table. The user will need to alter said column and set a default that makes sense, along with discarding the zone config (this latter is due to the fact that the zone config holds all outdated info related to the [partitions](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/partitioning.html), [constraints](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/constraints.html), etc.). These are due to a conflict with the `crdb_region` column already being present in the regionless restore. This column specifies each row's home region and is a prefix to the table's primary key. Stripping localities does not touch this column as it would be an expensive operation that includes rewriting the entire table. [#111863][#111863]

Author: added the links; made the edits

- The [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/restore.html) option `strip_localities` has been renamed to `remove_regions`. [#111863][#111863]

> - Users are not able to perform a [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/restore.html) with the `remove_regions` option if the object being restored contains a [regional by row table](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/table-localities.html#regional-by-row-tables). [#111863][#111863]

Author: Updated!

- Added a [builtin function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/functions-and-operators.html) `jsonb_array_to_string_array` that converts a [JSONB](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/jsonb.html) array to a string array. [#112864][#112864]

> - Updated the [builtin function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/functions-and-operators.html) `jsonb_array_to_string_array` to return _NULL_ objects. Previously, they were removed from the output. [#112864][#112864]

Author: Linked!

> - Fixed the [SQL activity page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/monitoring-and-alerting.html#sql-activity-pages) update job to avoid conflicts on update, reduce the amount of data cached to just what the overview page requires, and fix the correctness of the top queries. [#112864][#112864]

Author: Fixed

<h3 id="v23-1-13-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

- Added [metrics](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/metrics.html) for [Raft](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/architecture/replication-layer.html#raft) proposals and reproposals, specifically:
    - `raft.commands.proposed`: commands proposed to Raft by [leaseholders](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/architecture/overview.html#architecture-leaseholder). (Note that this metric includes both of the reproposed metrics below.)
    - `raft.commands.reproposed.unchanged`: commands retried/reproposed to Raft because they take too long to apply (so they might be dropped).
    - `raft.commands.reproposed.new-lai`: commands retried/reproposed to Raft because they were committed to Raft out of order (failed the LAI (lease applied index) or [closed timestamp](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/architecture/transaction-layer.html#closed-timestamps) check). [#113153][#113153]

> - Introduce a default-off [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cluster-settings.html) `kv.gc.sticky_hint.enabled` which helps expediting [garbage collection](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/architecture/storage-layer.html#garbage-collection) after range deletions, such as when a SQL table or index is dropped. [#110643][#110643]

Author: thanks,  took both of your suggestions!

<h3 id="v23-1-13-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- [DB Console](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/ui-overview.html) instances proxied at different subpaths that use [OIDC](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/cockroachcloud/configure-cloud-org-sso.html#oidc) will point to the correct relative path when attempting to use OIDC login. [#111290][#111290]

<h3 id="v23-1-13-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

> - Fixed a bug where the `pg_attribute` could have sparsely populated `attnum`'s since dropped columns were not included. Previously, the attribute number generated inside `pg_attribute` could be sparse because there would be gaps after columns were or dropped. This could be problematic for ORMs since this would mean that attribute numbers could be sparse, and they may not be designed to handle such gaps. To address this, this patch adds dropped synthetic columns into the `pg_attribute` table, which allows these tools to work correctly. [cockroachdb/cockroach#111119][#111119]

Author: Fixed, thank you

- Fixed a bug that could prevent [`RESTORE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/restore.html) from working if it was performed during a [cluster upgrade](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/upgrade-cockroach-version.html). [#112758][#112758]
- Queries with the `st_union` [aggregate function](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/functions-and-operators.html#aggregate-functions) could produce incorrect results in some cases due to the [query optimizer](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cost-based-optimizer.html) performing invalid optimizations. This bug has been present since the `st_union` function was introduced in v20.2.0. [#112795][#112795]

> - A warning for [technical advisory 99561](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/advisories/a99561) could incorrectly surface when [dropping secondary indexes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/drop-index.html) that store [primary key](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/primary-key.html) columns. [#112906][#112906]

Author: Fixed

> - Fixed a bug where if we create a [trigram index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/trigram-indexes.html) and later display it via [`SHOW CREATE TABLE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/show-create.html), the opclass for this trigram index is not shown. [#113077][#113077]

Author: Fixed

> - Fixed a bug where CockroachDB could incorrectly evaluate [lookup and index joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins.html) into tables with at least 3 [column families](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/column-families.html) in some cases (either "non-nullable column with no value" internal error would occur or the query would return incorrect results). The bug was introduced in v22.2. [#113108][#113108]

Author: Took both edits

> - Fixed a bug that could occasionally cause [schema change jobs](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/online-schema-changes.html) (e.g. table/index drops) to appear stuck in state "waiting for MVCC GC" for much longer than expected. This fix only applies to future schema changes - existing stuck jobs can be processed by manually force-enqueueing the relevant [ranges](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/architecture/overview.html#architecture-range) in the MVCC GC queue under the [DB Console's advanced debug page](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/ui-debug-pages.html). [#110643][#110643]

Author: check, check, and check

- Fixed a bug that could cause internal errors or panics while attempting to forecast [statistics](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/cost-based-optimizer.html#table-statistics) on a numeric column. [cockroachdb/cockroach#113798][#113798]

> - [`ALTER PRIMARY KEY`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-table.html#alter-primary-key) would incorrectly disable [secondary indexes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/indexes.html) while new secondary indexes were being backfilled when using the [declarative schema changer](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/online-schema-changes.html#declarative-schema-changer). [#113183][#113183]

Author: Fixed

> - Previously, when executing queries with [index / lookup joins](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins.html) when the ordering needs to be maintained, CockroachDB in some cases could get into a pathological behavior which would lead to increased query latency, possibly by 1 or 2 orders of magnitude. This bug was introduced in v22.2 and is now fixed. [#114143][#114143]

Author: Fixed

> - Fixed a bug where the [`SHOW STATISTICS`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/show-statistics.html) command previously incorrectly required the user to have the [admin role](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/security-reference/authorization.html#admin-role). It was intended to only require the user to have any privilege on the table being inspected. [#114479][#114479]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where the [`SHOW STATISTICS`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/show-statistics.html) command would incorrectly require the user to have the [`admin` role](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/security-reference/authorization.html#admin-role). It was intended to only require the user to have any privilege on the table being inspected. [#114479][#114479]
```

- Fixed a bug that could cause a query plan to skip scanning rows from the local region when performing a [lookup join](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/joins.html) with a [`REGIONAL BY ROW`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/table-localities.html#regional-by-row-tables) table as the input. [#114456][#114456]
- Fixed a bug that could cause [`ALTER DATABASE ... ADD/DROP REGION`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/alter-database.html#add-region) to hang if node localities were changed after regions were added. [#114197][#114197]

<h3 id="v23-1-13-performance-improvements">Performance improvements</h3>

> - Address a performance regression that can happen when the [declarative schema changer](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/online-schema-changes.html#declarative-schema-changer) is being used to [create an index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/create-index.html) with a concurrent workload. [#113724][#113724]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Addressed a performance regression that could happen when the [declarative schema changer](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/online-schema-changes.html#declarative-schema-changer) is being used to [create an index](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.1/create-index.html) with a concurrent workload. [#113724][#113724]
```

Author: Fixed

## v23.1.13

Release Date: December 5, 2023

{{ site.data.alerts.callout_info }}
This version is currently available only on select CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.dedicated }} clusters. If you wish to upgrade your cluster to this version, please submit a [support request](https://support.cockroachlabs.com/hc/en-us/requests/new).

This release is currently not available for CockroachDB {{ site.data.products.serverless }} and {{ site.data.products.core }} customers.

> {{ site.data.alerts.end }}

Reviewer 3: confirming that this language :lgtm: 
this also matches the language from the original admonition language we used for 23.1.11
https://docs.google.com/document/d/15Qkbg-WZx6JrEo5Qqft-k34PnVm_P_6tAAlkVH4FQBc/edit#heading=h.i6lmk2k77ao3

Author: awesome thanks!
